
# Solution

- Induced velocity at point `i` due to lifting surfaces `j` can be computed as 
$\sum_i c_i \vec \nu_i( \vec R_i - \vec R_j ) $ where $\vec \nu(\vec r)$ is a response function (greens function) generated by some closed or infinite vortex fillament (it must fulfill Helmhotz theorem so it cannot end in the air).
   - simplest physically meaningful $\vec \nu (\vec r)$ is generated by ***horseshoe vortex filament*** composed of one finnite line sement and two semiifinite lines at it ends with constant distribution of lift. 
- Interaction between lifing surfaces `i` and `j` can be computed by solution of linear syste:
   -  $\vec v_i = \vec v_{inf}  +  \sum_{i \neq j} \vec \nu_j( \vec R_i - \vec R_j ) $   (be sure to ommit `i=j`)
   -  $\Gamma_i = C P_i(\vec v_i)$ where $P_i$ is Lift polar of wing segment `i` 
      

### Basis Functions

- Generally response function $\vec \nu (\vec r)$ is computed by Biot–Savart law from along vortex filaments. For linear segment we can always express it as scalar integral times direction vector  $\hat d = \hat r \times d\hat l$. The scalar part of integral is best computed in plane $(c,s)$-plane:
   $\vec \nu (\vec r) =  C \hat d \int_c s \Gamma(c)/(c^2+s^2) $ 
   where $c=r cos \theta$ and $s=sin\theta$ and ($r^2=c^2+s^2$)  




- ***horseshoe vortex filament*** is problematic due it singularities which are draged behind the wing, and can interact with other surfaces. For dynamical simulation this is very bad.
- Calculation of wother vortex filaments may be difficut.
  - typicall numerical integration (Simpson, Gauss, Clenshaw–Curtis ) does not improve the problem of singularities, it actually introduces even more (each node generates other singular semiinfinite trailing vortex)
  - better it to describe itegrated function by polynominal with zeros at ends, which can be rather easily integrated.  NOTE: polynominal should describe whole function $\nu_y(x)$ not just lift distribution.

